I"*><p>The journey towards gender equality has existed for more than a century, tracing its roots from the suffragettes of the 19th century and the prehistoric attempts to reduce gender-based prejudice. Similar to other forms of discrimination, gender biases emanate from cultural beliefs and norms that   organize human race into stereotypes and use the same stereotypes to determine capability, position as well as societal roles. Historically, the male stereotype has been applauded, assigned to certain roles both at home and at the workplace, leaving the females to only participate as subordinates hardly holding the leadership position. However, with the continued feminism actions, the line between gender roles continues to blur, with Hillary Clinton’s attempt to secure the presidential seat in the US marked as the greatest achievement.</p>

<p>In essence, accordance with the civilization of man, gender is expected to be a non-issue in assigning roles in the workplace. However, the practicability of this presumption remains adamant following the underlying traditions, perceptions, and beliefs that associate gender with individual capability. This paper analyses the issue of gender roles in the workplace in wide perspective incorporating the underlying beliefs, ever growing tensions, the conflicting theories about the issue in an effort to understand this intricate and belligerent discussion. In essence, as gender bias tends to diminish in the modern workplace, other attributes emerge necessitating or rather justifying gender prejudice making it a complex issue.</p>

<p>Among the many theories addressing the origin of gender roles, patriarchy takes a forefront despite having faced major criticism. According to the patriarchal spouses, both men and women have historically agreed on specific gender roles that typically improved the entire society’s welfare. Basically, during the pre-industrialization era, most communities survived from hunting and gathering   an occupation that literally required the masculinity of a man. Therefore, men acquired the provider title in the family, and women typically became dependents of the male and thus rendering them more subordinates. Furthermore, human lifespan was short, and large families were considered as advantageous as they provided adequate labor and security required to protect the family. Therefore, women’s main task became   giving birth to children and rearing them as well as taking care of other home based activities. in that perspective, Men became applauded as the dominant sex, were assigned other important tasks such as trading with other communities, negotiating for peace, or even waging wars, a trait that resulted in an increase in male prestige., with women roles being taken for granted.</p>

<p>Together with the males’ physical attributes, possibly the view that males are generally stronger than their women, and the perceived higher intellectual property, the patriarchy notion seems to have extended to the modern generation despite the changes in the human habitat environment.  Furthermore, the chance to interact with other communities accorded to men, but denied to women, typically increased the intellectual capacity development gap. Men became relatively wiser, gained skills to tackle problems as women remained as subject to men’s decisions.</p>

<p>Though the environment has completely changed and the modern working environment mainly entails expertise rather than masculinity, the society still holds certain beliefs that define gender roles in favor of men.  Basically, Men are considered as strong negotiators, and thus seem to fare well in positions that entail negotiations and hence making them seem fitter in executive positions. The notion that men can negotiate better than women thrives from the patriarchal theory, that presumes that men used to incapacitate more interactions with other communities giving them the necessary skills to make negotiations.</p>

<p>Moreover, Men are considered to be more confident and more willing to take risks. This trait presents in men that have led to male domination in entrepreneurial-related activities as well as acting as pioneers in almost every sector. Worth noting, most discoveries in the human race are made by men ranging from the inventions of the 19th century, such as printing the machine to internet inventions in the 20th and 21st inventions such as the Internet, social media networking among many others.  Women have played the minority role in inventions with their major discoveries rotating around the home such as the Dishwasher discovered by Josephine Cochrane in 1886, Chocolate Chip Cookies invented by Ruth Wakefield and the solar Heated home system invented by Maria Telkes in the 1940s.</p>

<p>But then again, the female gender also has its strengths that make them better in some roles as compared to men. To start with, women tend to accept more challenges, probably due to the fact that society usually undermines their capability. According to a research, women are more hard working than men, are willing to take challenges, break normal working routines as well as tackle multiple tasks simultaneously. In accordance with the patriarchal theory, men are better placed for self-development while women’s comfort zone would entail being subordinate. Moreover, due to their poor negotiating skills, women tend to start at lower levels and are relatively lower salaried relative to their male counterparts.</p>

<p>But then again, women make better team players and are more receptive to team efforts, especially due to their ability to support leadership roles, or rather the ease of being ruled over as dictated by the patriarchal reasoning. Therefore, though men might hold major roles in the management, women are better placed in roles that require team efforts, especially those roles calling for persuasion and assertiveness. Basically, women relate better with clients, or rather strangers than men who seem to work better with the individuals they already know.  With these stereotypical differences, the society has remained with a notion that embracing gender roles in jobs aren’t discrimination as such, but a strategic approach that firms may embrace to improve labor productivity and efficiency. In essence, the better an organization places best fitting individuals into their roles, the higher the chances of gaining a competitive advantage.</p>

<p>In contrast to the existing gender roles perception, the concept of gender equality especially in the workplace has been running concurrently. Gender equality calls for an equal chance or rather letting the environment determine individual capabilities and job positions via examining productivity and efficiency rather than holding historical and outdated perceptions of the patriarchal theories. The concept of gender equality has evoked varied presumptions among scholars, with the fact that women and men typically possess the same skills in management and other roles, with their differences only relating to building up perceptions. Generally, studies and practical campaigns on gender equality are aimed at eradicating gender roles in the workplace to bring forth benefits categorized into three levels; viz individual level, enterprise level and the national levels.</p>

<p>At individual level, proponents embrace the benefits of an egalitarianism system.  According to Maslow’s theory of motivation, each individual regardless of their gender, social class or even race, aims at attaining self- actualization.  In that sense both women and men need to be given equal opportunities, otherwise, the anticipation of fairness would be compromised. As a matter of fact, egalitarianism has existed in the prehistoric times especially in old Europe, with women and men participating equally in agricultural roles.The concept of patriarchy emanated from interaction between these societies, conflicts and especially invasion of the Ukrainian steppes that created the initial hierarchy that led to modern civilization and political systems. In essence, gender roles trace their roots to modern civilizations and political systems that have always applauded men’s capability, at the expense of women development, making them more perceptual but practical. But then again, in accordance with stereotypical differences discussed earlier, the practicability of gender equality in the workplace becomes debatable. Nevertheless, at the individual level, gender equality advocates the only request for equal opportunity and letting the environment do the ranking by itself.</p>

<p>Startlingly, gender equality at the national level has both empirically and theoretically proved to be beneficial, in the sense that the major goal at the national level is to enhance economic development that typically leads to improved social welfare of the entire society.  Educating females, offering job opportunities as well as reducing gender-based barriers to career advancement has shown a strong correlation with improved country’s competitiveness. But then again, this entails equity rather than equality, where the nation utilizes the aforementioned female strengths to enhance productivity as they let men specialize on their best-fit roles.</p>

<p>In essence, women empowerment is considered as a tool to utilize the underutilized resources and thus ought to have a positive impact on economic growth, and therefore, national level benefits focus on the advantages of reducing male prejudice at the workplace. According to Conway (2012), empowering women and reducing women barriers, which literally implies eradicating the definition of gender roles, results in a reduction of the gap between male and female employment, and could yield up to 13% increment in the GDP as showcased by Goldman Sachs study on the Australian economy. This implies that gender roles might either be demeaning the economy, but on the other hand utilizing female labor does not imply replacing male labor but rather reducing resource underutilization by unlocking a hidden value, entailed in the female labor pool.</p>

<p>At the enterprise level, gender roles are prevalently discussed in line with the benefits that organizations derive from embracing gender equality relating to improved efficiency, productivity as well as gaining competitive advantage.  Women leadership has been the main subject of discussion, provoking various scholars to empirically analyze the impact of women involvement in leadership on performance. Empirical studies show a correlation between women leadership and increased organizational performance, but the relationship is limited to just mere correlation as there is no proof of causality.</p>

<p>But then again, as the workplace changes to accommodate more women in leadership positions, there is a general improvement in overall productivity and efficiency, creating a weak argument that the patriarchal system that favored men in leadership positions might be fallacious. In essence, though men tend to appear stronger, or even entail a higher level of confidence, leadership roles in the modern organization barely require this trait. As a matter of fact, a high proportion of leadership capability is acquired, and women similar to men can generate strong leadership via experience and skill gathering. Therefore, equality in leadership positions calls for an equal chance between men and women, as augmenting that women are better of than men would also result in an unnecessary stereotyping   that might bar objective judgment and untainted talent management.</p>

<p>All that said, gender biases and gender roles continue to dominate the modern workplace. According to a recent survey, the fight towards gender equality in the workplace has been partially fulfilled as the overall proportions approach a half, but the proportion of males in top positions remains higher than 90%. Most legal barriers to women rising to executive positions have been eradicated, but the trend of increasing women in such positions remains adamant. Basically, there exists a glass ceiling, or rather an artificial barrier that makes it hard for women to raise to their posts. Among the main causes of the glass ceiling, does the patriarchal mentality exist in both women and men that make women pursue careers not likely to award them promotions. As a matter of fact, organizational positions such as secretaries, customer care assistants, and other subordinate duties tend to accommodate more women and curb their progress career-wise. Worse though, even those individuals in mainstream job positions  are paid less than their male counterparts and hence may feel as less fit, reducing their intrinsic motivation to search for top positions.</p>

<p>Struggle towards gender equality faces various challenges that can be easily explained using the concept of invisibility. Worth noting, gender-based movements have existed for such a long time, and have succeeded to completely streamline the legal system to eradicate all barriers. However, the mental cognition of individuals, remain retardant into accommodating these adjustments and hence in response develop repulsive traits that reduce the practical effectiveness of gender equality moves. Basically, the term gender equality struggle has always been used to imply a fight towards improving the social status of ladies, especially in the workplace.</p>

<p>Thus, gender issues have turned to reflect female issues and gender equality rendered a feminist agenda in which men need to play very little. In that sense, women are left to struggle to make their own progress, men play a retardant role and let the environment do its selection. By doing this, men become oblivious of gender, and as a result become invisible players in the struggle towards gender equality. Consequently, the invisibility of men in the field has led to the invisibility of the underlying problem and hence combating the entire gender bias problem present in the workplace. In essence, men are in denial of the existence of the patriarchal system in the 21st century and blame women for not taking the awarded opportunities, a mentality that has led to an increased number of women retaining subordinate jobs where they feel more comfortable.</p>

<p>The recruitment process, promotion, and salaries have played a significant role in enhancing gender inequality in the workplace. Despite efforts put forth by gender equality activists, chauvinism seems to dominate these three factors that place women at different positions to men in the workplace.  As noted earlier, cultural stereotypes are used to define capabilities, and thus recruiters tend to adhere to these chauvinist ideologies, disregarding equality in skills. For instance, in many elective posts, most countries advocate for a 2/3 gender role but tend to focus on enlightening ladies to fulfill the third.  Moreover, the recruitment of women to job positions increases less proportionately relative to the rise in educational skill attainment. Promotions and salaries enhancements show a similar trend, enhancing the inferiority of women at the workplace.</p>

<p>In a nutshell, gender roles have existed in the human race cutting through social, cultural, economic and political organisations. Basically, the patriarchal system that applauds man as the dominant sex, plays a major role in defining gender roles. The patriarchal system was adopted in the historic times when the environmental system required the masculinity of a man to provide and protect the society, while women remained subordinate to men and focused on family-related chores. Though the environment has adversely evolved, the perceived male domination has barely changed and women and men in the modern world still align to these traditional presumptions.</p>
:ET